>> Kevin Powell: All right, so now that
we've got our mobile navigation set up and
we have it on our page, we need to
actually be able to open and close it.
And to do this, we are gonna be
using a little bit of JavaScript.
And along with just having to have
the JavaScript open and close it,
there's a few other things we need to
do because we have those area labels
that we were using in there.
So we have the area expanded, that we
need to toggle to show if the element
is actually open or closed as well.
So the very first thing we need to do is
actually create a JavaScript file to start
writing some JavaScript.
So over in my file explorer here,
I can just make a new file.
We can just call it main.js if
you wanted a different name,
come in with the name that
you're comfortable with there.
And we just don't wanna forget
once you create your file,
cuz I've done it many times, just like
with my CSS files, I forget to link it and
then it doesn't work.
And I don't know why nothing is working,
so we can come in with our script.
The src can look at our main.js and
I'm gonna throw a defer on here.
Just to make sure that the JavaScript
is running after the page is loaded.
If you also put your script tag at
the bottom, that would do the same thing.
I just like having everything in my head,
it's easier to stay organized that way.
And then just defer the JavaScript.
So the JavaScript won't start
slowing the page down as everything
else is trying to come in.
With that done, we need to figure out
the best way to actually get our button,
cuz the first thing we need to do is get
that button so we can track and listen for
clicks on it.
And right now, the button itself
doesn't have much on there.
If we go and take a look, or
it doesn't have a class or an ID on there,
if we take a look at it, and
maybe we'll go full screen.
We have the button there that just
has the area controls primary nav and
the area expanded a false.
You could definitely add either an ID,
a class, data attribute,
anything you want to be able to
hook into that with the JavaScript.
But I don't like adding things just for
the sake of it.
And again, we can sort of enforce doing it
the proper, accessible way by making it.
So we need to have our area controls on
there by using that as the way that we'll
find the element in JavaScript.
So I'm just gonna copy that area controls
to make my life a little bit easier.
And over here, we can say const navToggle
= document.querySelector.
And inside of a parentheses,
you do it like you would do a regular
element selector has to
be in quotation marks.
Sorry, an attribute selector, so we do
need the square brackets in there, and
I can paste in my area
controls equals primary nav.
The one thing to be careful with
if you're doing this is because
I'm using an attribute,
the attribute does have the quotation
marks, with a double quote on there.
So I just need to use the single quotes
out on the outside, or vice versa.
If you're using double
quotes on the outside,
you could replace the ones on
the inside with single quotation marks.
Either one is fine but you just need to
be consistent with how that's working.
If you're newer to JavaScript,
just really quickly,
the querySelector's looking at the page.
It's finding the first element on the page
that has this area attribute on there.
It's just using a CSS selector the same
way as anything and it's finding that.
Now, the other thing we do wanna get
is actually the navigation, as well,
that would be something else we
gonna have to hide and show.
So we might as well get
that while we're at it.
In this case, we could either
get it by the class or the ID.
We have the ID on there,
we have class on there, it's upto you.
You could get element by ID slightly
faster than a query selector, but
the optimization there is pretty minimal.
So you can decide which
way you wanna select it.
Since am using just
a regular query after there,
am gonna say const
primary Nav is equal to.
We'll do it the same way,
document.query selector,
and I'll do my primary navigation.
Or if you want the ID again, we had that
as ID primary Nav, they both would work.
With that in place now,
we might as well listen for
when things are being clicked on.
So we can start with that by
saying our nav toggle, and
we want to add an event listener.
And event listeners listen for
all sorts of events,
if you've never used one before,
there's tons of different things.
You can look it up on the MDM
to see all the different things.
We're gonna be looking at a couple
of different ones eventually, but
we'll see here an event listener,
and I wanna listen for a click.
We can just put click like that
inside quotation marks, single or
double would work.
You put a comma, and then after that,
you can put a function.
We could have declare a function down here
and just do it as a callback right here.
Or we can just do an anonymous
function right here.
So I'm just gonna do an arrow function,
so parentheses,
fat arrow, and then opening,
closing curly braces and hit return.
So I can do something when we click on it.
So it's basically when I click do whatever
is inside of this function right here,
and if I always like just doing a console
log of click, let's say, clicked.
I just do this the same reason on my
CSS files, I like doing a background on
the body of purple, or something
like that when I first get started,
just to make sure what I've done worked.
Instead of writing a whole bunch of code
and then realizing I made a silly mistake,
but not knowing what it is, cuz I have
20 lines that I'm looking through.
So right away,
we can test to see if this is working.
Because we're using a console log,
you can just right click and
inspect or
however you like opening your dev tools.
Look inside the console, and if you don't
see your console, like, if your dev tools
are sort of squished off to the side,
it would be in the arrow here.
This is in Chrome, it might be a little
bit different if you are in another
browser, and
you can select console from the drop down.
And, if I click there,
we see clicked comes.
And every time I click on it, we can
see it's working, cuz I'm getting that
the number just keeps going up every
time I click on there, nice and simple.
Of course, we don't want to just say it's
clicked, we actually wanna do something.
And I mentioned the first thing we wanna
do is actually change the area expanded,
cuz when we click on it,
it should become expanded.
Or actually, let's just go look again.
By default, the area expanded is set
to false because it will be closed,
I know we can see it right now.
But by default, it'd be closed,
when I click on it,
I wanna switch that to being open, so
the area expanded will become true.
For me,
the easiest way to do that is to first,
we can check whether or not,
like what is it currently?
So to do that, inside of here,
I'm gonna do another const.
I'm gonna say is, or
we're gonna assume navOpened
is equal to, and
then we get our navToggle.
And from this we can get a getAttribute.
And you can get any attribute you have,
if you're using data attributes,
it's actually a little bit easier
cuz you have datasets you can use.
But we can get attribute and
we can get our area expanded.
>> Kevin Powell: So
it'll look something like that.
And once again,
then we can do a Console log, just so
we can see what we're getting from that,
nav opened.
And if we go back,
I'll do it, whoops, sorry.
And then if we go, take a look in
the browser again, when I click on it,
I did something wrong,
because I'm getting a null.
Nav, toggle, get attribute, area expanded.
So yeah,
just make sure you spell things correctly.
[LAUGH] And that's copying and pasting
from somewhere else is a good way to do
that if you knew it was spelled properly.
So there we go,
now we're always seeing that it's false
because we'd had it set to false.
So by default it'd be coming through and
saying it false and because so
we're saying nav opened is equal to false,
basically, so
nav opened will either be true or false.
So it just gives us
an idea of where we're at,
I find it's sort of
an easy way to read that.
So it just gives us an idea of where
we're at, I find it's sort of an easy way
to read that, we say if nav Have opened
is equal you can either do true or false.
It's up to you.
We'll say, if it's equal to false, we want
to change it to something else, right?
So if nav opened is equal to false, then
what we can do is say that our navToggle,
and instead of doing a get attribute, when
we use get attribute, we're just getting.
The value of what it's equal to,
you can also do a set attribute and
when you do a set attribute and
say area expanded because that's
the one we're changing it now expanded.
You have to put two different things
the first one is what the attribute is.
And then you also have to come through and
say what you actually wanna set it to
In this case, I wanna set it to true.
Then here I can come in with an else and
say, we'll just copy
this cuz it's a bit faster,
navToggle area expanded false.
So we're saying if the nav
open is equal to false,
we're gonna set the attribute to true.
If the nav open is not equal to false,
that means it is equal to true,
we're switching it over,
so it's one or the other.
So now I've left this console
log down here at the bottom.
So we should see when I click on it, it's
false, then true, then false, then true,
then false, then true.
So it's gonna toggle back and
forth every time we click on it.
One thing that's really important here is,
in, if you know JavaScript a little bit,
you might feel like you can
just do something like this, so
you could check like nav opened,
or do it that way.
In a lot of situations,
that type of thing is the right idea,
but in this situation, that doesn't work.
And that's because when we're
getting the value of an attribute,
it's always going to be a string, so it's
not actually a Boolean of true and false.
It's just a piece of text
that's says true and false, so
we actually have to say is equal to false.
There's a way you could turn that into
a Boolean if you wanted to, but for me,
I just put in a simple if else statement
here, I think that's completely fine.
You could also fancy this up a little bit
as well with a good ternary operator.
But I find this really clear, it's only
four lines, I think it's the easiest way,
just if you're scanning through
to understand what it is.
So in my opinion,
I think that's the easiest way
to tackle that type of problem.
Now, with that done, we need to figure
out how we're going to style it,
to make it actually show up and hide.
And there's a few different
choices here that you could take,
none of them are necessarily wrong.
So on here, we're already doing some work,
so we could say when this is set to false,
we could add a class or
something else to the navigation itself.
So, using JavaScript, you can dynamically
add that onto the our primary nav here,
and so you can have a nav,
close nav, open classes.
Or something like that that you're
also toggling at the same time.
It would work completely,
it's not gonna cause any problems,
it's gonna work completely fine.
So if you prefer taking that approach,
you can definitely do it.
Once again, though,
since we're sort of in this area land and
trying to enforce using the proper
area attributes on everything.
I'm actually going to take advantage of
how the area expanded its switching to
change the styling on
my navigation itself.
So to be able to do that,
let's jump on over to the CSS.
All right, so now to style this up,
the first thing we want to do
is actually make it disappear.
So on my primary navigation here, where
let's actually go down inside my media
query cuz we want it to only be display
none if we're inside the media query.
We want this Navigation if we're at
larger screen sizes should still show up,
we'll deal with the button later on.
But when we're at the smaller size,
we want the display none,
and then when we click on it,
we want it to come in.
And we have to be careful here because
we're inside of primary navigation, and
then we're going inside here.
So, if I wanna create another,
there's a way of doing it that is nested
using an ampersand, but
it's kind of awkward to read.
So this is one of those times where it's
probably better to come outside of that
initial selector and
create a new media query.
It is be a little bit simpler for you to
look at, but I'll show you the alternative
after just in case you do prefer it,
keeping it all nested together.
So, I'm gonna say @media,
width is less than 760 pixels.
What I'm gonna do now is I
want to base the display
of the primary nav looking
at that area expanded.
So we start with the area expanded,
in area expanded is equal to true,
because if it is expanded,
we need to see it.
And because the way we have our
DOM set up here, the HTML set up,
our button is coming first and
the NAV is directly after it, and
like we saw when we used
our plus selectors before.
The plus selector is looking at
what comes directly before it.
So in this case, or
it's not the selector, it's a combinator.
So the plus combinator right there,
and then we can say.primarynavigation.
And we can change that
to a display of block.
And now when I click on it, it will
show up and when I click on it again,
it will go away.
So I can just make that a little bit
bigger so you can see everything.
So, there's the media query, and this is
a bit specific to how we've set things up,
as I mentioned, just because for this to
work is It has to be the button first, and
then the nav right here.
If you had anything else in between,
let's just put an empty element here,
it doesn't matter what it is, it's
gonna break the functionality of that.
Because the plus combinator is looking for
what's directly before it.
So is the area expanded of
the element directly before it true,
then I'll change it to display block.
If you want something that could work
with a bit of some differences going on,
you could switch this
plus out to the tilde.
This is a general preceding sibling, so
as long as any of the siblings that came
before it are the area expanded of true,
it will work.
So then we restored our
functionality there,
even though we have that
link in between them.
Either one of them works,
It depends on one of them,
I guess with the tilde it's
potentially a little bit safer.
So again, this is anything that
comes that's a direct sibling.
It won't look at other ancestors, it's
only looking at direct siblings that come
before it that have this,
then we can toggle it.
Again, we could do this with just
toggling a class on and off,
it's a little bit simpler
in the CSS side of things.
Rather than having to come in with
this kinda weird thing that we're
doing right now.
But this enforces us to use the proper
accessible way of doing things.
So if you had another team member came
in and they were replicating this.
The only way that it would work without
them writing any extra code is to have all
of the correct semantics placed on
the elements they're putting on the page.
So it's a nice way to enforce
things right It's right there.
Now I did mention that we could
do this with the nesting.
So if you prefer everything being nested,
I'm gonna cut this out,
bring it up inside where we have all
of our nesting, and switch this, and
I think this is gonna work,
to an ampersand.
Cuz the ampersand is the placeholder for
the original selector.
And so, there we go, that still works.
I would say that if anybody comes across
that, they're gonna look at it a little
confused, this is not
the most readable thing.
If you do this, leave a comment in your
code explaining what's going on cuz it
just looks really weird.
And people will not be used to seeing this
or you'll come back to your own project in
a month cuz you wanna steal
this to use it on another one.
And you'll have no idea what
this is actually either.
So if you decide to do this,
[LAUGH] it looks weird.
So definitely leave a comment, but
I'm gonna leave it outside in its own
media query,
just cause I find it a lot more readable.
And even if this, you feel like it does
need a little bit of an explanation,
leave a comment in your code to
explain what it's actually doing.
All right, and next, so the last thing we
need to do here is we notice when we're at
larger screen sizes, our button becomes
visible, which we don't want [LAUGH].
It should only be there when we're
at our smaller screen sizes,
this is the easiest part to fix for this.
All we want to do is when we're
not inside any media queries,
which is our larger screen sizes,
we can just come and in this case,
I don't wanna use the area expanded,
cuz that toggles back and forth.
But we do also have the area controls
that we used in our JavaScript as well to
select it, so I'm gonna do that too.
If you like or prefer having a class,
by all means, throw a class on here.
I don't see the point in adding
a class if I don't have to,
cuz I have something else that,
so that I can select it with.
And I'll do a display of none, so it
vanishes away and I don't have a button.
It's always gonna be gone now though,
but that's good at this size and not so
good at smaller screen sizes.
So then when we get into, or actually
we'll do this all the way at that bottom
media query down here, cuz it's not
part of our primary navigation.
So I can bring that back in,
make sure this one's not nested in that
primary navigation media query,
and we do a display of block.
>> Kevin Powell: And so
now at the smaller screen sizes,
we got our hamburger menu shows up and
at larger screen sizes, it disappears.
That one should is a little bit simpler
on how we can get that one to work.
One question I just thought about this is,
I am using a lot of attribute selectors,
and I get comments sometimes with
the performance of attribute selectors.
There's some really old articles
out there, like over ten years old,
they talk about how attribute selectors
are slower than class selectors.
The browsers are really
optimized these days.
For most selectors, you can throw at it,
you won't see any difference at all in
select performance
between the two of them.
Or if you do, it's so small,
it's impossible to even notice.
So yeah,
don't stress about attribute selectors,
don't stress about descendant selectors.
If you're using some really advanced,
crazy selectors with some modern
tools that are just coming out that
the browsers haven't optimized for.
It's the only time you could potentially
run into any issues with selector
performance.
And in general, selector performance,
again, CSS optimization,
it could be something you're worried
about, but I'd worry about images,
JavaScript and
a lot of other things first.